## Chaotic
Several years later, the law firm where I got my start pushing a mail cart and
working my way to junior software developer was a client of the software
consultancy I founded. Several employees, myself included, spent a good deal of
time in the legal offices as functioning members of their team. We wrote
software, managed databases, and assisted with security and infrastructure
concerns. The law firm had their own fulltime staff responsible for these
functions. We were there to provide advice and help make things happen.

It was a typical fall morning in Cleveland. Traffic was slightly heavier than
normal and I arrived at the office around 8:30 am, 30 minutes later than normal.
After hanging up my coat and getting some coffee, I settled into my chair to get
caught up on email and prepare for the upcoming day.

At about 8:45, somebody turned on a radio in the adjoining office.
I could faintly hear the voice of Howard Stern. I smiled wryly and thought,
"I don't know how they listen to that crap." Shock journalism is not my bag.

A moment later, the volume was increased to an unreasonable level. There was no
need for that. It was just plain inconsiderate of the ...

I heard Howard Stern's voice clearly now.
"It is a terrorist attack? What's going on?"
"They say it looked like a drunk driver headed toward the building."
"Look at that! It looks like a bomb went off in the World Trade Center!"

"You've got to be kidding me!", I thought, "What is this? Some war of the worlds
stunt? This can't be real. They're messing with people."

"We believe this is American Airlines flight 11. There are reports coming in
that the flight lost communication only a short while ago and veered off flight
plan. It looks like the plane accidentally struck the North Tower of the World
Trade Center. Unbelievable. Unbelievable. God help those people in the tower
and on the plane. Stay tuned as this story unfolds."

"That's enough.", I thought, "They need to turn it down, if not off. Who in
their right mind thinks this is at all funny?"

I locked my computer, picked up my coffee, and headed next door to ask them to
please lower the volume.

Stepping out into the hallway, I saw people huddled around laptops and radios.
Somebody was wheeling a tv cart into the office next to mine. A low buzz of
whispers and crying filled the hallway. People were speculating if it was an
accident or an intentional act.

"Probably some nut with a manifesto like that Ted Kaczynski character.
Only this one had a personal death wish. Odds are it is a solo hijacker.",
I overheard someone say.

Only moments later, at 9:03am, we learned it was not a solo hijacker.
With the TV cart in place, the radio volume was turned down and replaced by
live footage on the  screen. We stood there, dumbfounded and terrified, as
another plane crashed into the twin towers. This time, coming from the South
and hitting the southern tower.

Whatever was happening, it was no accident.

We huddled together for a few minutes. Everyone watching and everyone trying to
make sense of what we were seeing. Reports of evacuation plans for the towers
and updates on the combustion properties of jet fuel were the auditory backdrop
for the visual horror show before us.

People were calling home to check in with loved ones. People were calling
friends and family in New York to get more details. And people were headed out.
Kids were being sent home from school. Parents wanted to be with their families.

We had maybe half a crew left, when another plane hit the Pentagon at 9:37am.
We were contemplating whether or not we should send everyone home for the day.
Traffic was jammed up throughout the city as people were trying to make their
way out and back home all at once. For those of us with long commutes, staying
in the office until the panic died down seemed to make sense. We were getting
ready to send an email to all staff letting them know they could go home for the
day, if they wanted to.

Before we could send it out, we got a call from the office manager. "The
building is closing in 15 minutes. You need to get everyone out and shut down
the systems. We're on Federal lockdown until further notice."

"Wh.. what do you mean?", Geoff, the VP of IT Operations had picked up the call
and placed it on speaker phone for the room to hear.
"Federal lockdown? Everyone out? Shut down the systems? Our Disaster Recovery
plans don't cover this. There's no protocol...."

"Yes. Sure. Protocol. I don't have time for this. I have a lot of calls to make.
The building is not only a historical landmark, it is a federal reserve
building. They hit the Pentagon for God's sake! The Pentagon. We can't have
people in the building. Who knows what other targets they have lined up.
Who knows how long this will go on."

We had 15 minutes to get out. Security was already sweeping the building and
forcing people to leave. We had to power down all the systems, pull all the
drives, pull a complete set of tapes, and exit the building. All in 15 minutes
or less. And we had less then half of our crew as well as no procedure for
this kind of thing.

"All right people!", I heard from the back of the room, "You heard him. Let's
move. Everyone grab only critical personal items like your drivers license or
car keys. Everything else can stay. Dump out any bags you have or any boxes in
your office and bring them immediately to the computer room. Let's go, go, go!"

It was David, a mid-level technician from the infrastructure team. David was
in the reserves and was a volunteer fire fighter. Out of nowhere, and with no
positional authority, he'd started barking orders like he was in charge.

"David!", Geoff said sternly with a slight scowl on his face.
"What?", David asked, sounding calmly confident. Composed. Ready.
Geoff's face softened, "Maybe the file room would have empty boxes?"
"Good idea.", David replied, "Send two people to the file room. Everybody else
get to the computer room right away. Bring something, anything, you can carry
drives in."

Normally a quiet guy who was perfectly fine following and enforcing policy,
David was suddenly a powerful and charismatic force.
Without another thought, we all started moving, doing exactly as we were told.

In under 15 minutes, we'd dismounted all the drives in the server room, labeled
each and recorded with whom it was leaving, making sure to split up the drives
so that even if some of us lost the equipment or didn't return, we had the
best chance of the raid configuration fully recovering all the data. We powered
down all systems.

We did it all under David's able command.
There was no protocol.
There were dozens of options at each turn.
David surveyed the scene and occassionally sought input from others.
But it was his pronounced decisiveness and ability to issue a command with
conviction even when he was uncertain that allowed David to lead us through
the exit without issue.

This is the nature of chaotic work.
There is no plan or protocol.
We've likely never seen a situation like this before and we hope to never
see one like it again.
Finding the perfect answer is pointless.
Leadership is not about finding patterns or maximizing functional efficiency.
Leadership's only objective is to get out of chaos.
Leaders must act first to establish some sense of order, figure out the next
thing that needs to be done, and respond accordingly.
Leadership here is quite literally command and control.
The leader broadcasts to the rest of the group.
There is little time for input or debate.
Action is of the essence.
