# Complexity and Management

In 1965, Gordon Moore, co-founder of Intel made what at the time may have
seemed a simple observation. He noted that the number of transistors per square
inch on integrated circuits had doubled every year since the integrated circuit
was first demonstrated by Jack Kilby of Texas Instruments in 1958.
Moore predicted that this rate of growth would continue for the
foreseeable future. A decade later, in 1975, he revised the forecast to indicate
a doubling every two years. This observation and prediction became commonly
known in the electronics and computer industry as "Moore's Law". Not an actual
physical or natural law, the name stuck none the less.

Moore's prediction held true until around 2012 when the rate fell from the
steady pace of the prior 37 years. In 2015, Brian Krzanich, CEO of Intel,
confirmed that the pace has slowed to a doubling every two and a half years.

The impact of this has been tremendous. Computing power has essentially increased
exponentially for the better of 5 decades while the relative cost has decreased
at the same fundamental rate. With power and cost as two key drivers of
technological advancement, these trends in increased power and decreased cost have not
only contributed to the explosive growth of existing technologies, but have
enabled the launch of entirely new industries as well.

Through a series of advancements, computer chips have grown more powerful and
smaller at the same time, allowing for more computing power in smaller and
smaller components.
Advancements in integration and microelectromechanical
systems have resulted in accelerometers and gyroscopes in phones and even watches.
We wear devices on our wrists that measure our steps, altitude changes, and
sleep patterns.
These devices have more computing power than the systems that sent the first
men to the moon.
And they fit on our wrists!
Science fiction is becoming science fact right before our eyes.

Perhaps less immediately obvious yet more socially and economically significant
is the impact these advances have had on our work lives.

Throughout the 1950s and 60s, advances in technology allowed pre-integrated
circuit computers to both shrink in size and grow in capability.

By the late 60s, computers were becoming more commonplace in corporations and
IBM was selling more than 1000 System/360 systems per month.
Use of computers expanded beyond accounting and forecasting into manufacturing
and services for customers.
Automated Teller Machines, Airline Reservation Systems, Robotic Arms for
assembly in manufacturing, and computer networking systems such as ARPAnet,
which allowed for connection between different makes and models of computers
all came on-ine in the 1960s.

The 1960s also brought us BASIC and UNIX.
BASIC (Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code) is a computer language
developed by Thomas Kurtz and John Kemeny of Dartmouth College, BASIC was an
easy-to-learn programming language, making it ideal for students who had no
prior programming experience.
BASIC quickly spread to schools all over the world and by the 1980s, most
every personal computer was shipped with a version of BASIC embedded in
the system.
This opened up programming to an entirely new audience.

UNIX, which is to this day, the operating system that serves as the basis of
most modern computing systems was developed by Kenneth Thompson and Dennis Ritchie
in 1969.

In the 1970s, microprocessors grew increasingly available and powerful, giving rise
to hobbyists creating their own personal computers.
In January of 1975, Popular Electronics Magazine featured the MITS Altair,
the first commercially successful microprocessor kit, on their front cover.
By 1977, pre-assembled systems such as the Apple II and Tandy's TRS-80 were
made available and home computers became a burgeoning market.

Then in August of 1981, IBM Introduced the IBM-PC and the personal computer
quickly became a commodity item as companies started purchasing them and linking
them together into Local Area Networks (LANs).
Local Area Networks first allowed workgroups to collaborate more closely by
sharing files and conversing through text-based software.
In short order, LANs were able to handle larger and larger groups and we were
able to link LANs together into broader networks.
Now entire enterprises were connected, sharing files, using centralized applications,
and communicating via email, chat applications, and other collaboration tools.
