# Connection

Connection is multi-faceted. It is about connection to the company's cause,
connection to the customer, personal connection to your fellow workers, and
being connected through communication channels.

Connection is a crucial partner to Autonomy.
Autonomy without Connection leads to chaos.
Without connection to a cause and to one another, there's no shared direction,
no continuity, and inconsistent accountability.

Connection is a crucial partner to Excellence.
Excellence without Connection leads to strife.
Without a shared purpose and empathy for one another, excellence is too narrowly
focused. Teams compete with teams and divisions compete with divisions.

Connection is a crucial partner to Diversity.
Diversity without Connection leads to fiefdoms.


** From Article

Connection comes, in great part, from an open exchange of ideas.

Connection isn’t achieved through town hall meetings where executives present information to a silent audience. It is achieved through an open dialog where employees are free to ask questions and get immediate real-time answers.

Connection isn’t achieved through a monologue where product leadership explains the customer and their needs. It is achieved through real customers sharing their stories with the product teams, customers and team members making suggestions, and everyone engaging in discussion.

Connection isn’t achieved through a “Community of Practice” where an appointed subject matter expert gives a presentation and allows ten minutes for Q&A. It is achieved through open dialog in meetings where the agenda is set by the members of the community and the ability for everyone to commune across team and organizational boundaries.

Connection isn’t achieved through internal corporate new blurbs and approved announcements. It is achieved through public and open communication channels where anyone and everyone can participate.

To enable connection, offer fewer structured learning experiences and offer more open spaces and lean coffees, create open communication channels where employees are free to share,  encourage collaborative working such as pairing and ensemble, connect the work to the customer’s needs and the organization’s cause, and allow for social time at work - especially for remote workers.

Measurements for connection include employees' perceptions of how inspiring the company mission is, how well their work contributes to the company mission, how well they understand their customer and their customers needs, whether or not there are people at work who care about them as a person, and whether or not they have friends at work. Additional indicators include the use of messaging and collaboration tools and the amount of inner-source project activity.
