# Diversity

The more complex a problem, the less predictable the solution.
The less predictable the solution the more uncertainty.
The more uncertainty, the more varied the set of options we need to explore.
The more varied the options need to be, the more diverse the team generating the
options needs to be.
So, the more complex the problem, the more diverse the team needs to be.

The diversity we need is diversity of thought.
A truly diverse set of options would come from a group of people who see not only
the problem differently, but who see the world differently.
From the varied ingredients of their backgrounds and perspectives comes the recipe
for a truly unique and effective solution.

But how de we ensure diversity of thought?
We cannot see or touch thought.
We cannot sense it or measure it.
As a result, when we talk about diversity in most organizations what we mean is
a diversity of visible and other determinable differentiators.
We launch programs to show support for women in STEM and leadership roles.
We more deliberately recruit from colleges that have a student population that differs
from our own.
But do these efforts achieve the end we desire?
The verdict is out at the moment, but the science is promising.
At it turns out, visible differentiators, while relatively poor proxies for actual difference
in thought create an interesting phenomenon.
When we introduce an individual who looks different to a group, the group assumes
the new individual thinks differently than they do.
This in turn, causes the group to think differently.
Let's say we have a team whose been together for a while.
They all have the same gender identity and look relatively similar to one another.
They've similar educational backgrounds, work experience, and income levels.
They were all raised in the same general geographic region and share the same
colloquial language patterns.
So we can fairly safely assume that they think similarly to one another.
If we introduce another member to the group; someone they've not previously met.
Someone with a similar educational background, work experience, and income level.
But someone who looks significantly different - perhaps they identify differently
and have a significantly different complexion.
They were actually raised in the same geographic region but were raised in a
household where english was a second language and they have an accent.
The group will rapidly identify this individual as an outsider; as different.
As a result, they will expect the new member to think about problems in a different way.
This actually causes the existing members to change the way that they think.
So by introducing visual differentiators to a group, we are introducing diversity of
thought, not necessarily because the new member adds diversity of thought, but
because the existing group members change their thought process.


** From Article
Through diversity, organizations create teams capable of solving complex problems.

Command worked for manufacturing processes. The problems were relatively simple - they could be analyzed and systematized. We could determine one best way to do them and people just needed to be compliant. Diversity was, perhaps, seen as detrimental. The more exchangeable people were, the smoother everything ran.

But with the advent of knowledge work, we moved into a new era. Knowledge work was first used to address complicated problems. The types of problems that required specialized expertise. The types of problems where the worker often had more information than management and was better equipped to make decisions. Specialization meant diversity of workers was becoming more beneficial.

As we resolved the early challenges of automating known systems such as accounting or basic human resources functions, we moved into an age of discovery. Today, we are breaking new ground more than we are automating the known. These problems are not simple or even complicated. They are complex.

The more complex a problem, the less predictable the solution. The less predictable the solution the more uncertainty. The more uncertainty, the more varied the set of options we need to explore. The more varied the options need to be, the more diverse the team generating the options needs to be. So, the more complex the problem, the more diverse the team needs to be in order to discover good solutions.

A small group of individuals from varying backgrounds with differing perspectives and specialties working together are capable of generating more options and considering more alternatives than a team of experts all with similar backgrounds and expertise.

Diversity is more than race or gender. It includes aspects such as religion, politics, age, abilities, language, personality, gender identification, sexual orientation, and lifestyle. All of these culminate into differing perspectives, thought processes, and abilities, which creates a rich environment for creativity and innovation.

The benefits of diversity go beyond the ability to solve complex problems. Diversity also correlates to better overall decision-making, increased retention, increased profits, and improved company reputation.

To enable diversity, model diversity in the leadership ranks, ensure hiring and promotions have a focus on job-criteria backed by data, create autonomous resource groups and outreach committees, acknowledge and honor people’s religious and cultural differences, and create reward structures and working arrangements that are open, flexible, and can be adapted to each individual’s specific preference or need.

Measurements for diversity include workforce composition by demographics (age, race, gender identity, etc.), employee satisfaction by demographic, employee turnover by demographic, promotions by demographic as a percentage of workforce composition, and diversity of those selected for hire versus the candidate pool.
